+++
title = "Critical Digital Literacy and Web Archives"
date = "2020-05-10"
[ author ]
  name = "Cal Murgu"
+++

**Lesson Plan**

**Learning Outcomes**

1.  Students will read a text on web archives and demonstrate good
    comprehension of the text and technology explained therein

2.  Students will be able to explain how contemporary historical
    research can be conducted using web archives

3.  Students will be able to identify potential problems, challenges,
    and opportunities of web archive use in historical research

4.  Students will learn how to find web archive collections and use them
    for historical research

5.  Students will be able to explain how web archival collection
    policies impact how we collect, preserve, and disseminate digital
    documents

**Class 1**

An Introduction to Web Archives in an Age of Abundance

**Assigned Readings**

Milligan, I., Ruest, N., & Onge, A. S. (2016). The great WARC adventure:
Using SIPS, AIPS, and DIPS to document SLAPPs. *Digital Studies/Le champ
numérique*.

The (open access) article details the circumstances surrounding a libel
case that was filed against academic librarian Dale Askey by publisher
Herbert Richardson, the resulting online debate and advocacy, and the
effort by the authors to capture, preserve, and make available preserved
websites related to the event. The article presents the technical
aspects of capturing and preserving WARC files in a technical but
accessible way. Furthermore, it reflects on some of the challenges of
creating a traditional finding aid to contextualize and provide access
to the collected electronic content. Finally, the article discusses some
preliminary findings based on analysis of the data set by a professional
historian. 

**Prior to Class**

Students should come prepared having read the article and having watched
a short 3-minute video from the Library of Congress on Web archiving
uploaded to Canvas. Given that this is a somewhat technical article,
discussion questions are provided ahead of time (uploaded to the LMS
along with the article). [Hypothes.is
](https://web.hypothes.is/), a
web annotation tool available through our LMS, is also enabled, to
encourage students to read the article and annotate it collaboratively.

**Discussion questions**

1.  What do you think about the motive behind the \#freedaleaskey
    collection given the perspective of the authors?

2.  Could you explain the process of creating a surrogate of a webpage
    after reading this article's technical description of web archiving?

3.  This was not an entirely straightforward process. What challenges
    did the authors face and how did they overcome these challenges,
    both technologically and socio-technically?

4.  Beyond a description of how and why this Web archive was created,
    how did the addition of a historian's use of the web archive
    influence or inform your understanding of the article?

5.  What important websites would you want to preserve, and why?

**Group Activity**

The small irony of this example is that the "\#freedaleaskey collection"
no longer exists in the web accessible form it once did. The repository
that once held its contents
[http://freedaleaskey.plggta.org/](http://freedaleaskey.plggta.org/)
is no longer available. The only way to get a sense of what the
\#freedaleaskey collection looked like is to use the Internet Archive's
WayBack machine. 

1.  Break up the participants into groups and ask them to attempt to
    locate the \#freedaleaskey Collection on the web. A search for the
    \#freedaleaskey collection on a search engine like Google only
    retrieves secondary literature, or information about Dale Askey and
    the authors of the article cited previously. After several minutes,
    reveal to the students that what they have been searching for no
    longer exists, and discuss possible reasons behind it (human and
    technical resourcing, etc). 

2.  Direct students to the Internet Archive WayBack Machine
    [http://web.archive.org](http://web.archive.org) and
    have them search for the following url:
    [http://freedaleaskey.plggta.org/](http://freedaleaskey.plggta.org/).
    The WayBack machine is an open source software that renders WARCs in
    a web browser, either locally on your machine or on a dedicated
    server. The resulting calendar view maps the number of times
    http://freedaleaskey.plggta.org/ was crawled.

3.  Twenty-four snapshots of the website exist between August 13, 2013
    and March 23, 2018. Have your students navigate through the
    snapshots to gain an understanding of how the WayBack machine
    works, as well as how the repository worked when it was live.
    Under the "Letters of Support" tab, for instance, point out that
    thumbnails (as described in detail in the article) are included;
    however, upon clicking on the links we are redirected to an error.
    This means that while the links were crawled, the endpoint was
    not. This inconsistency reflects not only the thoroughness of a
    crawl, but also represents a seemingly lost digital object. As
    Winters writes, "A missing image confronts us with a blank square
    on the web page; a broken link produces an error" (Winters,
    2017, p. 245). 

<!-- -->

3.  Consider discussing how the website has changed sometime between
    March 14th, 2014 and August 17th, 2014, from a traditional
    repository view with document navigation to a simple rendering of
    a WordCloud. 

<!-- -->

3.  Finally, emphasize the fact that web archiving is a unique form of
    archiving that shifts the focus on capturing *versions* of
    webpages over time, rather than archiving and preserving *one*
    document through time. 

**Class 2**

Web Archives and Source Criticism

**Introduction**

In the first lesson, students were introduced to Web archives through a
specific example. The article ends with a short description about how
Web archives can be used for historical research. This lesson focuses on
introducing students to Library of Congress collections and identifying
potential use cases for research where Web archives can prove useful.
Library of Congress collections vary in size, from small collections
featuring a few dozen websites to collections that include thousands of
individual pages. The variation in size speaks to the strategy that
guides the collections' development.

1.  Introduce the Library of Congress Web archive collections, point out
    the variety in size and subject matter, and briefly describe their
    collection development policies.

2.  Explore two of the largest collections in the catalog: the September
    11, 2001 Web Archive, a collection that "preserves the web
    expressions of individuals, groups, the press and institutions in
    the United States and from around the world in the aftermath of the
    attacks in the United States on September 11, 2001," and the US
    Elections Web Archive, which includes the "campaign sites archived
    weekly during the election seasons since 2000, documenting sites
    associated with presidential, congressional, and gubernatorial
    elections." Beyond providing us with a metaphorical portal into the
    past, which allows us to explore these websites almost as if we had
    stepped back in time, both of these collections are ripe for
    applying source criticism strategies discussed previously. 

**Group Activity**

1.  Class split into four groups. Each group is assigned one of the two
    collections (alternatively, each group to pick a unique
    collection). 

2.  Group A to compare how the web pages (content) of federal agencies
    changed on September 11, 2001 to reflect what had happened in New
    York and Washington, D.C. 

3.  Group B to analyze the general 'depth' of the Library of Congress'
    crawl, noting, for example, how many web pages included missing
    images, broken links, and other errors. 

4.  Group C to study the US Elections Web Archive to examine the
    websites of Republican or Democratic candidates in a specific
    district chosen by students, paying close attention, for instance,
    to how graphics and imagery were utilized to denote certain elements
    of their political platform. 

5.  Group D perform a similar study to group B, by analyzing the 'depth'
    of the crawl for Republican or Democratic candidates of their
    choice.

**Final Discussion**

The final discussion is a flexible group discussion on the issue that
students encountered in their work. Make connections between the
importance of preserving the Web (citing the \#freedaleaskey
collection), the technical components of Web archives (*versions*
instead of *fixed* analog documents), as well as the subjective
decisions that go into Web archive collections (variability in content,
size, and quality in the Library of Congress collections).
